Packaging how to (#4031)
Textualize/textual: docs/how-to/package-with-hatch.md

# Package a Textual app with Hatch

> Python apps may be distributed via [PyPi](https://pypi.org/) so they can be installed via `pip`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Python apps may be distributed via [PyPI](https://pypi.org/) so they can be installed via `pip`.
```

Reviewer: PYthon Packing Index
Might be worth a search + replace for this typo. It shows up a couple of times and I'm not sure I marked all instances.

This is known as *packing*.
The packaging process for Textual apps is much the same as any Python library, with the additional requirement that we can launch our app from the command line.

!!! tip

    An alternative to packaging your app is to turn it in to a web application with [textual-web](https://github.com/Textualize/textual-web).

In this How-To we will cover how to use [Hatch](https://github.com/pypa/hatch) to package an example application.

> Hatch is a *build tool*.

Reviewer: What's a build tool?

There are other build tools, such as [Poetry](https://python-poetry.org/).
Packaging with Poetry is similar to Hatch, so you may want to read this even if you are a Poetry user.

!!! info inline end "Calculator example"

    ```{.textual path="examples/calculator.py" columns=100 lines=41 press="3,.,1,4,5,9,2,wait:400"}
    ```

    This example is [`calculator.py`](https://github.com/Textualize/textual/blob/main/examples/calculator.py) taken from the examples directory in the Textual repository.

## Foreword

Packaging with Python can be a little intimidating if you haven't tackled it before.
But it's not all that complicated. 
When you have been through it once or twice, you should find it fairly straightforward.

## Example repository

See the [textual-calculator-hatch](https://github.com/Textualize/textual-calculator-hatch) repository for the project created in this How-To.

## The example app

To demonstrate packaging we are going to take the calculator example from the examples directory, and publish it to PyPi.

> The end goal is to allow a user to install it with pip:

Author: I think "via" is less clear than "with". I think its fair to assume the reader is familiar with pip at this point, even beginners.

```bash
pip install textual-calculator
```

> Then launch the app from the command line:

Author: I don't think either adds any clarity...

Enter `hatch new` followed by the name of your project.
For the calculator example, the name will be "textual calculator":

```batch
hatch new "textual calculator"
```

This will create the following directory structure:

```
textual-calculator
├── LICENSE.txt
├── README.md
├── pyproject.toml
├── src
│   └── textual_calculator
│       ├── __about__.py
│       └── __init__.py
└── tests
    └── __init__.py
```

This follows a well established convention when packaging Python code, and will create the following files:

- `LICENSE.txt` contains the license you want to distribute your code under.
- `README.md` is a markdown file containing information about your project, which will be displayed in PyPi and Github (if you use it). You can edit this with information about your app and how to use it.
- `pyproject.toml` is a [TOML](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/TOML) file which contains *metadata* (additional information) about your project and how to package it. This is a Python standard. This file may be edited manually or by a build tool (such as Hatch).
- `src/textual_calculator/__about__.py` contains the version number of your app. You should update this when you release new versions.

> - `src/textual_calculator/__init__.py`  and `tests/__init__py` indicate the directory contains Python code (these files are often empty).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `src/textual_calculator/__init__.py`  and `tests/__init__py` indicate that the directories they are in contain Python code (these files are often empty).
```

 
In the top level is a directory called `src`.
This should contain a directory named after your project, and will be the name your code can be imported from.
In our example, this directory is `textual_calculator` so we can do `import textual_calculator` in Python code.

> Additionally there is a `tests` directory where you can add any [test](../guide/testing.md) code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, there is a `tests` directory where you can add any [test](../guide/testing.md) code.
```

### More on naming

> Note how Hatch replaced the space in the project name with a hyphen (i.e. `textual-calculator`), but the directory in src with an underscore (i.e. `textual_calculator`). This is because the directory in `src` contains the Python module, and a hyphen is not legal in a Python import. The top-level directory doesn't have this restriction and uses a hyphen, which is more typical for a directory name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note how Hatch replaced the space in the project name with a hyphen (i.e. `textual-calculator`), but the directory in `src` with an underscore (i.e. `textual_calculator`). This is because the directory in `src` contains the Python module, and a hyphen is not legal in a Python import. The top-level directory doesn't have this restriction and uses a hyphen, which is more typical for a directory name.
```

> Bear this in mind, if your project name contains spaces.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Bear this in mind if your project name contains spaces.
```

name = "textual-calculator"
dynamic = ["version"]
description = 'A example app'
readme = "README.md"
requires-python = ">=3.8"
license = "MIT"
keywords = []
authors = [
  { name = "Will McGugan", email = "redacted@textualize.io" },
]
classifiers = [
  "Development Status :: 4 - Beta",
  "Programming Language :: Python",
  "Programming Language :: Python :: 3.8",
  "Programming Language :: Python :: 3.9",
  "Programming Language :: Python :: 3.10",
  "Programming Language :: Python :: 3.11",
  "Programming Language :: Python :: 3.12",
  "Programming Language :: Python :: Implementation :: CPython",
  "Programming Language :: Python :: Implementation :: PyPy",
]
dependencies = []
```

We are interested in the `dependencies` value, which should list the app's dependencies.
If you want a particular version of a project you can add `==` followed by the version.

For the calculator, the only dependency is Textual.
We can add Textual by modifying the following line:

```toml
dependencies = ["textual==0.47.1"]
```

At the time of writing, the latest Textual is `0.47.1`.
The entry in `dependencies` will ensure we get that particular version, even when newer versions are released.

> See the Hatch docs for more information on specifying [dependencies](https://hatch.pypa.io/latest/config/dependency/).

Reviewer: Shouldn't we encourage reading how Hatch tells you to specify dependencies more strongly and earlier than we mention that you can edit that list by hand and type`==` to pin versions?

Author: This sentence is so close to the others, that I think it will be fresh in the readers mind.

## Environments

> A common problem when working with Python code, is managing multiple projects with different dependencies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A common problem when working with Python code is managing multiple projects with different dependencies.
```

For instance, if we had another app that used version `0.40.0` of Textual, it *may* break if we installed version `0.47.1`.

The standard way of solving this is with *virtual environments* (or *venvs*), which allow each project to have its own set of dependencies.
Hatch can create virtual environments for us, and makes working with them very easy.

> To create a new virtual environment, navigate to the directory with the `pyproject.toml` file and run the following command (you will only need this on first run):

Reviewer: What does “on first run” mean?
If you know nothing about virtual environments, it's not very clear when this should be run in the process.

```bash
hatch env create
```

Then run the following command to active the virtual environment:

```bash
hatch shell
```

> If you were to run `python` now, it will have our app and dependencies available for import:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you run `python` now, it will have our app and its dependencies available for import:
```

Author: Omitting needs words... 👍

```
$ python
Python 3.11.1 (main, Jan  1 2023, 10:28:48) [Clang 14.0.0 (clang-1400.0.29.202)] on darwin
Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.
>>> from textual_calculator import calculator
```

### Running the app

You can launch the calculator from the command line with the following command:

```bash
python -m textual_calculator.calculator
```

The `-m` switch tells Python to import the module and run it.

> Although you can run your app this way (and it is fine for development), its not ideal for sharing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although you can run your app this way (and it is fine for development), it's not ideal for sharing.
```

> It would be preferable to have a single command to launch the app, so the user can easily run it from the command line.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It would be preferable to have a dedicated command to launch the app, so the user can easily run it from the command line.
```

`python -m textual_calculator.calculator` _is_ a single command. An annoying one, but just one.

To do that, we will need to add an *entry point* to pyproject.toml

## Entry points

An entry point is a function in your project that can be run from the command line.
For our calculator example, we first need to create a function that will run the app.
Add the following file to the `src/textual_calculator` folder, and name it `entry_points.py`:

```python
from textual_calculator.calculator import CalculatorApp

def calculator():
    app = CalculatorApp()
    app.run()
```

!!! tip

    If you already have a function that runs your app, you may not need an `entry_points.py` file.

Then edit `pyproject.toml` to add the following section:

```toml
[project.scripts]
calculator = "textual_calculator.entry_points:calculator"
```

> Each entry in the `[project.scripts]` section (there can be more than one) maps a command on to an import and function name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each entry in the `[project.scripts]` section (there can be more than one) maps a command onto an import and function name.
```

Author: Both are valid.

In the second line above, before the `=` character, `calculator` is the name of the command.

> The string contains the name of the import (`textual_calculator.entry_points`) followed by a colon (`:`) and the name of a function (also called `calculator`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The string after the `=` character contains the name of the import (`textual_calculator.entry_points`), followed by a colon (`:`), and then the name of the function (also called `calculator`).
```

> It is equivalent to doing the following from the Python REPL:

Reviewer: “It”, what?

“Specifying an entry point like this is equivalent to running the following from the Python REPL:”?

```
>>> import textual_calculator.entry_points
>>> textual_calculator.entry_points.calculator()
```

To add the `calculator` command once you have edited `pyproject.toml`, run the following from the command line:

```bash

> pip install -e .

Reviewer: If the reader is a beginner, they won't know what `-e` does nor why you need it here.

Author: The reader doesn't really need to know, but I'll explain in an admonition for the curious.

```

Now you can launch the calculator from the command line as follows:

```bash
calculator

> ```

Reviewer 2: I believe you have to be in a `hatch shell` for this to work?

Author: Yes, its assuming the reader is already in the shell after the previous section.

> ## Building 

Reviewer: What's “building”?

Author: Explained in the following sentence?

Building produces archive files that contain your code.
When you install a package via pip or other tool, it will download one of these archives.

To build your project with Hatch, change to the directory containing your `pyproject.toml` and run the `hatch build` subcommand:

```
cd textual-calculator
hatch build
```

After a moment, you should find that Hatch has created a `dist` (distribution) folder, which contains the project archive files.
You don't typically need to use these files directly, but feel free to have a look at the directory contents.

!!! note "Packaging TCSS and other files"

    Hatch will typically include all the files needed by your project, i.e. the `.py` files.
    It will also include any Textual CSS (`.tcss`) files in the project directory.
    Not all build tools will include files other than `.py`; if you are using another build tool, you may have to consult the documentation for how to add the Textual CSS files.

## Publishing

> After your project has been successfully built you are ready to publish it to PyPi.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After your project has been successfully built you are ready to publish it to PyPI.
```

> If you don't have a PyPi account, you can [create one now](https://pypi.org/account/register/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you don't have a PyPI account, you can [create one now](https://pypi.org/account/register/).
```

Be sure to follow the instructions to validate your email and set up 2FA (Two Factor Authentication).

> Once you have an account, login to PyPi and go to the Account Settings tab.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you have an account, login to PyPI and go to the Account Settings tab.
```

Scroll down and click the "Add API token" button.
In the "Create API Token" form, create a token with name "Uploads" and select the "Entire project" scope, then click the "Create token" button.

Copy this API token (long string of random looking characters) somewhere safe.

> This API token is how PyPi authenticates uploads are for your account, so you should never share your API token or upload it to the internet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This API token is how PyPI authenticates uploads are for your account, so you should never share your API token or upload it to the internet.
```

Run the following command (replacing `<YOUR API TOKEN>` with the text generated in the previous step):

```bash
hatch publish -u __token__ -a <YOUR API TOKEN>
```

> Hatch will upload the distribution files, and you should see a PyPi URL in the terminal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Hatch will upload the distribution files, and you should see a PyPI URL in the terminal.
```

### Managing API Tokens

> Creating an API token for all projects is required for the first upload.

Reviewer: I don't think it's clear that “all projects” here refers to the _permissions_ of the token.

You may want to regenerate an API token for just the one project when you upload the next version.

> This way if your token is leaked, it will only impact the one project.

Reviewer: “the one project” feels opaque and is not very clear.
There are ways to rewrite these two sentences to make them easier to read and clearer as to what you're proposing: that you create an API token for each project you have.

### Publishing new versions

If you have made changes to your app, and you want to publish the updates, you will need to update the `version` value in the `__about__.py` file, then repeat the build and publish steps.

!!! tip "Managing version numbers"

    See [Semver](https://semver.org/) for a popular versioning system (used by Textual itself).

## Installing the calculator

From the user's point of view, they only need run the following command to install the calculator:

```bash
pip install textual_calculator
```

They will then be able to launch the calculator with the following command:

```bash
calculator
```

### PipX

A downside of installing apps this way is that unless the user has created a [virtual environment](https://docs.python.org/3/library/venv.html), they may find it breaks other packages with conflicting dependencies.

> A good solution to this issue is [pipx](https://docs.python.org/3/library/venv.html) which automatically creates virtual environments that won't conflict with any other Python commands.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A good solution to this issue is [pipx](https://github.com/pypa/pipx) which automatically creates virtual environments that won't conflict with any other Python commands.
```

> Once PipX is installed, you can advise users install your app with the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once PipX is installed, you can advise users to install your app with the following command:
```
```suggestion
Once PipX is installed, you can advise that users install your app with the following command:
```

```bash
pipx install textual_calculator
```

> This will install `textual` as before, but without the potential of dependency conflicts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will install the calculator and the `textual` dependency as before, but without the potential of dependency conflicts.
```

## Summary

1. Use a build system, such as [Hatch](https://hatch.pypa.io/latest/).
2. Initialize your project with `hatch new` (or equivalent).
3. Write a function to run your app, if there isn't one already.

> 4. Add your dependencies and entry points to `pyproject.toml`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Add your dependencies and entry points to `pyproject.toml`.
```

# Package a Textual app with Hatch

Python apps may be distributed via [PyPI](https://pypi.org/) so they can be installed via `pip`.
This is known as *packaging*.
The packaging process for Textual apps is much the same as any Python library, with the additional requirement that we can launch our app from the command line.

!!! tip

    An alternative to packaging your app is to turn it into a web application with [textual-web](https://github.com/Textualize/textual-web).

In this How To we will cover how to use [Hatch](https://github.com/pypa/hatch) to package an example application.

Hatch is a *build tool* (a command line app to assist with packaging).
There are other build tools, such as [Poetry](https://python-poetry.org/).

> Packaging with Poetry is similar to Hatch, so you may want to read this even if you are a Poetry user.

Reviewer 2: This post isn't far off from being a hatch tutorial - if someone is a beginner and is using Poetry, I feel like reading this post will be confusing, and telling them that they may want to read it might set up expectations that it's going to be more helpful than it is.

 
In the top level is a directory called `src`.
This should contain a directory named after your project, and will be the name your code can be imported from.
In our example, this directory is `textual_calculator` so we can do `import textual_calculator` in Python code.

Additionally, there is a `tests` directory where you can add any [test](../guide/testing.md) code.

### More on naming

Note how Hatch replaced the space in the project name with a hyphen (i.e. `textual-calculator`), but the directory in `src` with an underscore (i.e. `textual_calculator`). This is because the directory in `src` contains the Python module, and a hyphen is not legal in a Python import. The top-level directory doesn't have this restriction and uses a hyphen, which is more typical for a directory name.

Bear this in mind if your project name contains spaces.

### Got existing code?

The `hatch new` command assumes you are starting from scratch.
If you have existing code you would like to package, navigate to your directory and run the following command:

```

> hatch new --init <YOUR PROJECT NAME>

Reviewer 3: It was [previously expressed](https://github.com/Textualize/textual/pull/3977#discussion_r1445964855) that we should avoid the use of `<...>` in documentation; I see it used a few times in here. Are we comfortable with this now?

Author: It is explained in the docs what the `<>` means, which I just added.

We can add Textual by modifying the following line:

```toml
dependencies = ["textual==0.47.1"]
```

At the time of writing, the latest Textual is `0.47.1`.
The entry in `dependencies` will ensure we get that particular version, even when newer versions are released.

See the Hatch docs for more information on specifying [dependencies](https://hatch.pypa.io/latest/config/dependency/).

## Environments

A common problem when working with Python code is managing multiple projects with different dependencies.
For instance, if we had another app that used version `0.40.0` of Textual, it *may* break if we installed version `0.47.1`.

The standard way of solving this is with *virtual environments* (or *venvs*), which allow each project to have its own set of dependencies.
Hatch can create virtual environments for us, and makes working with them very easy.

To create a new virtual environment, navigate to the directory with the `pyproject.toml` file and run the following command (this is only require once, as the virtual environment will persist):

```bash
hatch env create
```

Then run the following command to active the virtual environment:

```bash

> hatch shell

Author: Are you certain its not a virtual env? If I do `which python` and go to that subdirectory, it looks exactly like a virtual env. There appears to be a venv for every hatch project on my system.

> hatch shell

Reviewer 2: Yes, it's definitely a shell. If you type `exit` or press Ctrl+D it'll leave the subshell.

    It will also include any Textual CSS (`.tcss`) files in the project directory.
    Not all build tools will include files other than `.py`; if you are using another build tool, you may have to consult the documentation for how to add the Textual CSS files.

## Publishing

After your project has been successfully built you are ready to publish it to PyPI.

If you don't have a PyPI account, you can [create one now](https://pypi.org/account/register/).
Be sure to follow the instructions to validate your email and set up 2FA (Two Factor Authentication).

Once you have an account, login to PyPI and go to the Account Settings tab.
Scroll down and click the "Add API token" button.
In the "Create API Token" form, create a token with name "Uploads" and select the "Entire project" scope, then click the "Create token" button.

Copy this API token (long string of random looking characters) somewhere safe.
This API token is how PyPI authenticates uploads are for your account, so you should never share your API token or upload it to the internet.

Run the following command (replacing `<YOUR API TOKEN>` with the text generated in the previous step):

```bash

> hatch publish -u __token__ -a <YOUR API TOKEN>

Reviewer 2: Aside: This must be considered bad security practice vs env vars because your API token is going to be in plain text in your shell history and will be more likely to leak.

Author: How do you set the env var without it going in to the history then?

Would it be better to omit the `-a` and have Hatch ask us for the key?

Reviewer 2: Either via your shell startup file as an env var, having Hatch ask for the key, or removing it from your history after running. Not necessarily saying you should change this btw, it was just a note.

```

Hatch will upload the distribution files, and you should see a PyPI URL in the terminal.

### Managing API Tokens

Creating an API token with the "all projects" permission is required for the first upload.
You may want to generate a new API token with permissions to upload a single project when you upload a new version of your app (and delete the old one).
This way if your token is leaked, it will only impact the one project.

### Publishing new versions

If you have made changes to your app, and you want to publish the updates, you will need to update the `version` value in the `__about__.py` file, then repeat the build and publish steps.

!!! tip "Managing version numbers"

    See [Semver](https://semver.org/) for a popular versioning system (used by Textual itself).

## Installing the calculator

From the user's point of view, they only need run the following command to install the calculator:

```bash

> pip install textual_calculator

Reviewer 2: I understand that this is here mostly to later go on and explain why it's a bad idea, but it does feel like it's advertising this approach to some extent.

If I'm following along as a beginner, I'm probably going to run this command because you haven't told me it's a terrible idea yet. Maybe we shouldn't be sharing the actual snippet here 🤷

```

They will then be able to launch the calculator with the following command:

```bash
calculator
```

> ### PipX

Reviewer 3: Small point: I believe the correct way to write its name is pipx; I don't think I've ever seen it referred to as PipX in [its documentation](https://pipx.pypa.io/stable/).
